External applications (#185)
void-linux/void-docs: src/config/external-applications.md

# External Applications

## Programming Languages

> > The Void repositories have a number of python and lua packages. If possible,
> > try to install packages from the Void repos using xbps-install or use xbps-src
> > to package your python or lua application. Packaging your application with
> > xbps-src will keep your system clean. If you send your package upstream it
> > will allow other Void users to benifit and allow them to help you maintain
> > your package. To learn how to package for xbps-src see the
> > [manual](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/blob/master/Manual.md)
> > and [contributing
> > instructions](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer: To start off, use Python, Lua and Linux when referring to them, unless you're talking about the package itself.

I'm having a complicated thought process regarding this one. People who develop in those languages sometimes don't really have the option of depending on distro packages, due to versioning issues and a bunch of other stuff. Perhaps something closer to:

```suggestion
> The Void repositories have a number of Python and Lua packages. If possible,
> install packages from the Void repositories or consider packaging the library or application you need.
> Packaging your application allows for easier system maintenance and can benefit
> other Void Linux users, so consider making a pull request for it. The contribution instructions can be found
>  [here](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).
```

> To keep your system lean, Void splits packages and their devel packages. If you
> install a program via the languages package manager (pip, gem, etc.) or compile
> via source you may need to install the programming language's devel package to
> ensure your program builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep packages smaller, Void has separate `devel` packages for header files and development tools. 
If you install a library or application via a language's package manager (i.e. `pip`, `gem`) or compile
one from source, you may need to install the programming language's `-devel` package. This is specially
relevant for `musl` libc users, due to pre-built binaries usually targeting `glibc` instead.
```

| Language | Package Manager                | Void Package  |
|----------|--------------------------------|---------------|
| Python   | pip, anaconda, virtualenv, etc | python3-devel |
| Ruby     | gem                            | ruby-devel    |

> | lua      | luarocks                       | lua-devel     |

Reviewer: Use code blocks: `python3-devel`, `ruby-devel` and `lua-devel`. I'm not completely against making a section for Python 2 and one for Python 3, either.

Author: I added both your suggestions

## Restricted Packages

> Some packages have legal restrictions on their distribution (ie. discord), may
> be too large, or have another condition that makes it difficult for the void
> team to distribute. These packages are maintained but not distributed. As such,
> they must be built locally. For more information see the page on [restricted
> packages](../repositories/restricted.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some packages have legal restrictions on their distribution (i.e. Discord), may
be too large or have another condition that makes it difficult for the Void
team to distribute. These packages are maintained but not distributed. As such,
they must be built locally. For more information see the page on [restricted
packages](../repositories/restricted.md).
```

## Non-x86_64 Arch

> The entire Void build system is using the x86_64 architecture. xbps-src allows
> us to cross-compile for other architectures and their glibc or musl variant.
> However, some packages (ie. libreoffice) do not support cross-compilation. For
> these appplications, you must build the application locally on the machine you
> want to use the package. For compiling and installing xbps-src applications see
> the [building instructions](../packages/building.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Void build system runs on x86_64 computers, both for compiling and cross compiling packages.
However, some packages (i.e. `libreoffice`) do not support cross-compilation.
These packages have to be built locally on a computer running the same version of Void Linux as the one running
where you want to use the package. For building packages,  see the [building instructions](../packages/building.md).
```

## Flatpak

Flatpak is another method for installing external proprietary applications on
linux. For information on using flatpak with Void Linux, see the [official

> flatpak documentation](https://flatpak.org/setup/Void%20Linux/).

Reviewer: You need to capitalize Linux and Flatpak in this paragraph. And I think "external" in this case doesn't need to be mentioned. If it is proprietary, it is external already.

Perhaps add "proprietary applications, such as Spotify and Steam."

@bobertlo do you think we have to mention that Steam also has a package? With zero guarantees, as it stands.

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not protect you from the malicious features
> proprietary applications may have. Whenever possible, try to use free software

> > with Void Linux.

Reviewer: I really like this paragraph, I just don't know if it fits the tone we want to have on the docs.

@bobertlo what do you think?

Reviewer 2: i'm not sure the last sentence is necessary; i think it would be sufficient to just say something like "Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security- and/or privacy-violating features of proprietary software".

Author: I think proprietary applications usually have more malicious features than just merely security issues and privacy violations.

ie: vendor lock-in, censorship, deception, using one software to enforce the use of another one of your corporation's offerings.

It's more accurate to mention malicious features or anti-features.

Reviewer 2: i don't disagree with your points in general - although i would disagree with any implication that FOSS never has anti-features - but the Handbook is technical documentation, and i'm concerned about starting down a steep slippery slope. i'd prefer that we didn't set a precedent for the Handbook to become a place where people argue over licensing issues. So i think that what we need to focus on is letting people know that 'sandboxing' is not a magical protective incantation.

(i regularly encounter people who think that merely using OpenBSD means their system is secure, regardless of what software they install and use.)

Author: That is a good point. If anyone has a recommendation to change the wording such that the tone is better while ensuring users know that sandboxing is not magic, I will accept it.

Reviewer: @anjandev, I really like flexibeast's wording.

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security- and/or privacy-violating features of proprietary software.

It's short and sweet.

Author: Changed to @flexibeast's wording

distribute. These packages have build templates, but the packages themselves are
not built or distributed. As such, they must be built locally. For more
information see the page on [restricted
packages](../repositories/restricted.md).

## Non-x86_64 Arch

The Void build system runs on x86_64 servers, both for compiling and cross
compiling packages. However, some packages (e.g. `libreoffice`) do not support
cross-compilation. These packages have to be built locally on a computer running
the same architecture and libc as the system on which the package is to be used.
For building packages, see the [building instructions](../packages/building.md).

## Flatpak

Flatpak is another method for installing external proprietary applications on
Linux. For information on using Flatpak with Void Linux, see the [official
Flatpak documentation](https://flatpak.org/setup/Void%20Linux/).

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security and/or
> privacy-violating features of proprietary software.

In some instances, this may be fixed by installing one or more of the
`xdg-desktop-portal`, `xdg-desktop-portal-gtk`, `xdg-user-dirs`,

> `xdg-user-dirs-gtk` or `xdg-utils` packages.

Reviewer: It's not clear what "this" is. You might have deleted the context :B 

I think switching "this" for "issues" should be enough.

Reviewer: As a matter of fact, whynot include this paragraph in troubleshooting?

### Troubleshooting

Some Flatpaks require D-Bus. If you are using a window manager (e.g. i3wm) add
`dbus-run-session` to your window manager's launch. They can also require

> [Pulseaudio](./media/pulseaudio.md).

Reviewer: I don't really like this phrasing... Something like "you can launch your window manager with dbus-run-session" feels much cleaner. If you could link its man page, that'd be even better. https://man.voidlinux.org/dbus-run-session.1

must be built locally. For more information see the page on [restricted
packages](../repositories/restricted.md).

## Non-x86_64 Arch

The Void build system runs on x86_64 computers, both for compiling and cross
compiling packages. However, some packages (i.e. `libreoffice`) do not support
cross-compilation. These packages have to be built locally on a computer running
the same version of Void Linux as the one running where you want to use the
package. For building packages, see the [building
instructions](../packages/building.md).

## Flatpak

Flatpak is another method for installing external proprietary applications on
Linux. For information on using Flatpak with Void Linux, see the [official
Flatpak documentation](https://flatpak.org/setup/Void%20Linux/).

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security and/or
> privacy-violating features of proprietary software.

However, some apps may not function properly (e.g. not being able to access the
host system's files). To fix this, install the following packages:
xdg-desktop-portal xdg-desktop-portal-gtk xdg-user-dirs xdg-user-dirs-gtk

> xdg-utils

Reviewer: Remember to use backticks for formatting package names :)

```
`xdg-utils`
```

Author: fixed in latest patch

> `xdg-user-dirs-gtk` `xdg-utils`

Reviewer: Perhaps some commas between them too? Then an "and" before the last one too. More like a list.

### Installing Themes

You can install themes with Flatpak and Flatpak will automatically match your
computer's Gtk theme to one installed with Flatpak. For example, if you use the
theme Plata-Noir in your regular desktop environment, you can install the
Flatpak counterpart with the command

```
# flatpak install -y flathub org.gtk.Gtk3theme.Plata-Noir
```

You can search for additional Gtk themes with the command

```
# flatpak search org.gtk.Gtk3theme

> ```

Reviewer: These commands don't need root, right? So the most correct way to display them would be using `$` instead of `#`.

# External Applications

## Programming Languages

> The Void repositories have a number of Python and Lua packages. If possible,
> install packages from the Void repositories or consider packaging the library
> or application you need. Packaging your application allows for easier system
> maintenance and can benefit other Void Linux users, so consider making a pull
> request for it. The contribution instructions can be found

> > [here](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Reviewer 2: Further to [this recent comment of mine](https://github.com/void-linux/void-docs/pull/217#discussion_r419204420), i think this text shouldn't be quoted, particularly if the intent of the quoting is to achieve layout effects - i'd prefer to keep our markup as semantic as possible.

To keep packages smaller, Void has separate `devel` packages for header files
and development tools. If you install a library or application via a language's

> package manager (i.e. `pip`, `gem`) or compile one from source, you may need to

Reviewer 2: "e.g." not "i.e."

Comma before "or".

install the programming language's `-devel` package. This is specially relevant
for `musl` libc users, due to pre-built binaries usually targeting `glibc`
instead.

| Language | Package Manager                | Void Package    |
|----------|--------------------------------|-----------------|
| Python3  | pip, anaconda, virtualenv, etc | `python3-devel` |
| Python2  | pip, anaconda, virtualenv, etc | `python2-devel` |
| Ruby     | gem                            | `ruby-devel`    |
| lua      | luarocks                       | `lua-devel`     |

## Restricted Packages

> Some packages have legal restrictions on their distribution (i.e. Discord), may

Reviewer 2: "e.g." not "i.e."

> be too large or have another condition that makes it difficult for the Void team

Reviewer 2: Comma before "or".

Suggest "Void" rather than "the Void team".

> to distribute. These packages are maintained but not distributed. As such, they

Reviewer 2: Hmm, i think i'd prefer this to say something more like:

"These packages have build templates, but the packages themselves are not built or distributed."

must be built locally. For more information see the page on [restricted
packages](../repositories/restricted.md).

## Non-x86_64 Arch

> The Void build system runs on x86_64 computers, both for compiling and cross

Reviewer 2: s/system/server/? Otherwise it might be read as implying that users must use x86_64 to build packages.

compiling packages. However, some packages (i.e. `libreoffice`) do not support
cross-compilation. These packages have to be built locally on a computer running

> the same version of Void Linux as the one running where you want to use the

Reviewer 2: Presuming that by "version" we mean "architecture" - and, i assume, libc - i'd suggest something along the lines of:

"These packages have to be built locally on a Void system with the same architecture and libc as the system on which the package is to be used."

package. For building packages, see the [building
instructions](../packages/building.md).

## Flatpak

Flatpak is another method for installing external proprietary applications on
Linux. For information on using Flatpak with Void Linux, see the [official
Flatpak documentation](https://flatpak.org/setup/Void%20Linux/).

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security and/or
> privacy-violating features of proprietary software.

However, some apps may not function properly (e.g. not being able to access the

> host system's files). To fix this, install the following packages:

Reviewer 2: i imagine not all Flatpak issues can be solved simply by installing the `xdg-*` packages, so i suggest something like:

"In some instances, this may be fixed by installing one or more of the \`xdg-desktop-portal\`, \`xdg-desktop-portal-gtk\`, \`xdg-user-dirs\`, \`xdg-user-dirs-gtk\` or \`xdg-utils\` packages."

`xdg-desktop-portal`, `xdg-desktop-portal-gtk`, `xdg-user-dirs`,
`xdg-user-dirs-gtk`, and `xdg-utils`.

### Installing Themes

You can install themes with Flatpak and Flatpak will automatically match your

> computer's Gtk theme to one installed with Flatpak. For example, if you use the

Reviewer 2: "GTK"

Does this mean that as soon as one installs a theme Flatpak, one's system will automatically use that theme? Does one have to do a `flatpak install` whenever one wants to change Flatpak theme, even if one wants to change back to a Flatpak theme installed previously?

Author: I think Im going to take this section out. I have been using flatpaks for the last couple days and I cannot find an application that is not following my system's theme.

If this is an issue, people can refer to the official documentation.

theme Plata-Noir in your regular desktop environment, you can install the
Flatpak counterpart with the command

```
$ flatpak install -y flathub org.gtk.Gtk3theme.Plata-Noir
```

> You can search for additional Gtk themes with the command

Reviewer 2: "GTK"

```
$ flatpak search org.gtk.Gtk3theme
```

### Troubleshooting

> Some Flatpaks require D-Bus, enable the `dbus` service with runit. They can also

Reviewer 2: Do they require a system bus, or a session bus, or both? The `dbus` service provides the system bus, but if a Flatpak requires only a session bus, enabling the `dbus` service will not be necessary, and a session bus will need to be made available instead. (For example, i haven't enabled the `dbus-service`, but start i3 via `dbus-run-session`.)

Author: I am not sure about this. I will change it to the starting `dbus-run-session`. Maybe starting the systemwide dbus is unneeded.

Reviewer 2: Well, it depends on the graphical session one is using. `dbus-run-session` won't be needed in the GNOME context, for example, because it will have created a session bus via other means. So we can't simply specify use of `dbus-run-session` here.

> require Pulseaudio, see [Pulseaudio](./media/pulseaudio.md).

Reviewer 2: "require \[PulseAudio\](./media/pulseaudio.md)."

must be built locally. For more information see the page on [restricted
packages](../repositories/restricted.md).

## Non-x86_64 Arch

The Void build system runs on x86_64 computers, both for compiling and cross
compiling packages. However, some packages (i.e. `libreoffice`) do not support
cross-compilation. These packages have to be built locally on a computer running
the same version of Void Linux as the one running where you want to use the
package. For building packages, see the [building
instructions](../packages/building.md).

## Flatpak

Flatpak is another method for installing external proprietary applications on
Linux. For information on using Flatpak with Void Linux, see the [official
Flatpak documentation](https://flatpak.org/setup/Void%20Linux/).

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security and/or
> privacy-violating features of proprietary software.

However, some apps may not function properly (e.g. not being able to access the
host system's files). To fix this, open a console and enter:

```
# xbps-install -S xdg-desktop-portal xdg-desktop-portal-gtk xdg-user-dirs xdg-user-dirs-gtk xdg-utils

> ```

Reviewer: You should list the packages that need to be installed, instead of giving the xbps-install command.

Author: Changed. Thanks

### Installing Themes

You can install themes with Flatpak and Flatpak will automatically match your
computer's Gtk theme to one installed with Flatpak. For example, if you use the
theme Plata-Noir in your regular desktop environment, you can install the
Flatpak counterpart with the command

```
# flatpak install -y flathub org.gtk.Gtk3theme.Plata-Noir
```

You can search for additional Gtk themes with the command

```
# flatpak search org.gtk.Gtk3theme

> ```

Reviewer: Is there some official place where this documentation can be found? It might be better to link to that instead. Otherwise I think it's okay to leave it.

Author: I could not find this info anywhere else. Leaving it in

### Troubleshooting

Some Flatpaks need dbus. Enable dbus with the command

```
# ln -s /etc/sv/dbus /var/service/

> ```

Reviewer: Same for this one. Just say that the `dbus` service needs to be enabled.

Reviewer: Also, the name is "D-Bus"if you're not taking about the package.

Author: Changed. Thanks

> `libgomp-devel` `libgfortran-devel` `gcc-fortran` `gcc` packages.

Reviewer: You removed the colon, but please keep the commas and "and" :p

Some Flatpaks require Pulseaudio to be set up properly, see

> [Pulseaudio](./media/pulseaudio.md).

Reviewer: Suggest `dbus` instead of dbus. Since you're repeating "Some Flatpaks", I'd get these in the same paragraphs, like

"... runit. They can also require Pulseaudio..."

> [Pulseaudio](./media/pulseaudio.md).

Reviewer: And this header should be moved to above the octave one, since it should be under Flatpak ;)

Flatpak documentation](https://flatpak.org/setup/Void%20Linux/).

> Flatpak's sandboxing will not necessarily protect you from any security and/or
> privacy-violating features of proprietary software.

However, some apps may not function properly (e.g. not being able to access the
host system's files). To fix this, install the following packages:
`xdg-desktop-portal`, `xdg-desktop-portal-gtk`, `xdg-user-dirs`,
`xdg-user-dirs-gtk`, and `xdg-utils`.

### Installing Themes

You can install themes with Flatpak and Flatpak will automatically match your
computer's Gtk theme to one installed with Flatpak. For example, if you use the
theme Plata-Noir in your regular desktop environment, you can install the
Flatpak counterpart with the command

```
$ flatpak install -y flathub org.gtk.Gtk3theme.Plata-Noir
```

You can search for additional Gtk themes with the command

```
$ flatpak search org.gtk.Gtk3theme
```

### Octave Packages

Some octave packages require external dependencies to compile and run.

For example to install the control package, you must install the:
`openblas-devel`, `libgomp-devel`, `libgfortran-devel`, `gcc-fortran`, and `gcc`

> packages.

Reviewer: This shouldn't be under Flatpak, should it? I think the header should be `##` only. 

Suggestions:

* "Some Octave packages"
* everything in a single paragraph
* "For example, to build" -> make it clear it's building something instead of just downloading it. I would also do "the `openblas-devel` ...", without a colon.

Author: changes added
